GitHub Education
################

..  include::   /references.inc

GitHub_ is arguably one of the most popular homes for millions of
:term:`open-source` projects. If you are a developer, you should have an
account there, and post examples of your code as part of building up a
portfolio showing what your development skills look like. You can let others
help you with your work, or you can contribute to their work. All of this is
free for :term:`open-source` projects.

Lately, GitHub_ has been extending their system so it can be used in education.
When using GitHub_ in an academic setting we do not want all work to be public,
so the have set up a way to keep class work private to just that class. They
have always offered a way to keep projects private, but you have to pay for
that option. The educations system is still free, but is managed by a
registered instructor.

GitHub Organizations
********************

To make this work, GitHub_ lets a registered instructor create an
``Organization`` for the class and make all students members of that
organization. GitHub_ makes it possible to restrict access to anything stored
in this organization to just those folks who are members of that organization.
The owner of the organization (your instructor) can set things up so only you
can see a things relating to a project, or only members of a team can see that
project, or the entire class can see it. That way, things you do for the class
will not be visible to the world, but just to some collection of your
classmates.

In the past I have set things up so only you and I can see your personal work.
Based on things I am hearing from others using this system, I am going to make
the class more open this term. That means you will be able to see the work of
others, just like you would in a real organization, like the company you hope
end up getting a job with. 

Academic Integrity
==================

Of course, this opens up an entirely new issue. Who does the work? It would not
be fair for someone to simply copy the work of another and submit it as their
own. In fact, it is pretty easy for me to spot that. I am going to combat that
problem by having you work on all assignments in a small group made up of at
least two class mates for normal lab projects, and probably about four folks
for bigger projects. You (and your team mates) will work together to get an
assignment done. The GitHub_ system will let me see who authors what part of
that assignment, so I can spot assignments where only one of you did any work.
The grades might reflect that, so make sure you contribute.

Guess what! This is exactly how your future employer will operate. If you
contribute little to the company project, the odd are you will not be with that
company for long. This is the time to make sure you do contribute, and that work
will make sure you have the skills needed to get that job in the first place
(and keep it!)

Joining the Organization
************************

The first thing we need to do is get you set up on GitHub_. Navigate to their
web site and join up, it is free. Pick a user name that your future employer
will be happy with, not something so cute for your friends. Whether you like it
or not, employers get am impression of the kind of employee you might be by the
image you project on the Internet. Going nuts on Facebook might come back to
haunt you later. YMMV!

Send your GitHub_ user name to your instructor as soon as you can. It is needed
to add you to the organization.

When you start to work on projects for your class, consult :ref:`github-workflow`.

..  vim:filetype=rst spell:

