..  _github-introduction:

Setting up on GitHub
####################

..  include::   /references.inc

Employers tell us that they like to see examples of code you have written as
part of their decision process when considering you for a job. Unfortunately,
most of the code you produce while in school should not be posted to a public
site, for obvious reasons (at least I hope they are obvious).

Many students write code for personal projects on the side (in their spare
time?). Those projects are good candidates to be posted on a site like GitHub_,
a public forum for :term:`open-source` software used by thousands of
programmers. This site is based on the Git_ :term:`SCCS` tool, commonly used in
the programming world as well.

I recommend that you set up your own account there, and put up projects you are
interested in, especially examples of code that future employers might find
interesting. The service is free, unless you want to keep things private, in
which case, you have to pay a monthly fee.

I keep my course notes, and code from my lectures there, and keep a number of
projects covering research I do to explore other tools, or develop my own.

Create Your Account
*******************

Open up a web browser and navigate to https://github.com. You should see a
place where you can set up a free account. GitHub_ also supports private
repositories, but you have to pay a fee for those. FOr our work, the free
account will do fine.

..  warning::

    Pick a reasonable user name for your account. I suggest something you would
    be willing to let a potential employer know, not something "cute" that only
    your friends will understand. I have had students set up questionable user
    names, and had those students barred from using lab machines because the
    names were offensive (to some). YMMV!

Once you have your account set up, email the user name to me, and I will add
tyou to something GitHub_ calls an "Organization". Organizations are a way to
isolate a group of users so only members of the organization can see work done
by members. GitHub_ has set up something called ``GitHub Education``
specifically so instructors can use this system for class projects. You will
receive an email asking if you want to join the organization. Obviously, you
should accept the invitation.

We will go over all of this in class. For now, just get your account set up and
email the user name to me.

..  vim:filetype=rst spell:
