Component Life
##############

Although it might be tempting to think of a component as a sort of function,
taking inputs and producing outputs, doing so is actually a mistake.

We "call" functions from some place in our program code. This activates the
function at the moment when the call is processed. A furry of code generates a
result, and you "return" to the point where you made that "call". 

Real components are never "called", and they certainly do not "rerturn".
Instead, they just sit there doing their thing in response to a signal of some
kind.

Signals
*******

Have you ever wondered how data actually moves around in a computer? It is not
magic, just simple physics. Actually, all that really moves are charged
particles we call electrons. The flow of these electrons is called electricity,
and we measure that electricity using terms like **volts** and **amps**.

It may help to think of electricy like the flow of water through a pipe.
Voltage can be thought of as the pressure causing those electrons to move.
Amperes is a measure of how manty electrons pass a given point in a given
period of time.  

..  warning::

    High voltage and high current can be dangerous. Fortunately, when we work
    with computers, things are pretty safe. Still it pays to be careful.

Computer components usually operate at around 5 volts, (3.3 is more common for
portable systems). We call a signal with a voltage of around 5 volts a "1", and
a signal with a voltage around 0 volts a "0". Our data is just a sequence of
these voltage levels observed over some period of time as they travel from place
to place inside our system!

Wires
*****

A signal can just sit there not moving at all. Think of a battery, ready to go,
but not connected to anything.

To make electrons move, we need a **circuit**, which is a closed path made up
of a conducting material that allows electrons to move through it. A source of
electrons, (our power supply) is in this circuit, and electrons move from the
source point of that power supply 9which we usually think of as the positive
side of the supply, to the opposite side of the supply, which we usually call
the negative, or ground side, of the supply.

The conducting material we use is usually called a wire. That is chunk of
conducting material, usually copper, formed into a thing cylinder and streched
very long. Wires are common in our world, but in a computer they can be made by
laying a thin strip of copper on a non-conducting surface like silicone These
wires are called "traces" and carry electrons everywhere in our components.

Resistance
**********

Electricity moves at the speed of light through a conductor, which is pretty
fast! SOmetimes, we want to restrict the amount of current moving through the
circuit. We do that be adding a gadget called a resistor to our circuit. Like a
kink in a hose, the resistor restricts the flow of electrons.


Clock Signals
*************

The most common signal is a clock signal, generated by an oscillating circuit.
The actual signal is usually just a "squre wave" made ou of equal sized periods
of "0s" and "1s". Components are designed to react when the clock signal
switches from a "0" to a "1". This is called the **rising edge** of the signl. 

Here is a picture showing the clock signal over some period of time:

..  image:: square-wave.png
    :align: center

This signal happens at a precise rate, usually very fast in modern processors. For example, my Pentium processor in my Macbook runs at 2.7 GHz, which is pretty good for a laptop!

Triggering Actions
******************

When the signal is noticed by the component, actions happen inside the
component. Those actions include examining the inputs available at that moment,
and then performing some actions based on those iputs. A by-product of those
actions might be updating an internal storage place, or setting up a specific
set of output values. 

Wires
Those output values are placed on one end of a transmission path (whhich we
call a wire) and where they go is not a concern of the component at all. 
